Live session. This is a public hearing for the
Health and Safety at Work Amendment Bill, and we'd love to hear from you.
We've got 10 minutes of time with you. That includes time for questions.
It's up to you how do you utilize that, and it's over to you.
Thank you. I'm here representing contractors in horticulture,
wine grapes, post-harvest, and processors.
Our organization is a voluntary organization.
Our members employ
upward of 20,000 people.
Our work is seasonal, as you can guess, and there
are two distinguishing features about our
members' workforce.
Mostly through the year, they have a small number of permanents, and depending on
the size of the business, that might be 10, 20, 30,
40 permanents. But during the seasons,
when harvest and pruning happens, that can grow to 400,
500 plus people.
And the other distinguishing feature is our workers are out in the
field. It's in
small locations, so you might have at
20 locations teams working, but they're all working in small
numbers.
And for every, say, 12 people, there's a
supervisor. So highly supervised, small teams
working around the countryside.
What the bill focuses on is the number of employees.
Our submission is the number of employees doesn't actually determine risk.
It can be a factor, but the risk is determined about where you're working.
So our ask is to recognize our special
circumstances in the bill and change that
number quotient to either be an average across the year, but
also to recognize that we work at small
sites,
where the workers might number less than 20 under direct
supervision. And so,
our real view is that if the bill could be amended to make allowance
for contracting. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mike. Just to
start us off,
that is something we have heard frequently, so we do appreciate a different
perspective on how that could be framed.
So, the first question we have is from Jan Tinetti.
Hi, Mike. Good to see you.
Hi, Jan.
In a new role, well, different role from when I probably last spoke to you.
I've-
Yeah. Well, I float around.
Hey, I've got a couple of questions about that threshold, and-
Yes
... I'm just trying to understand from this perspective, can
you sort of talk me through probably the modeling or
evidence that you've got to suggest you talk about recommending
raising it to, I think it was 40 or 50 workers in-
Yeah
... your submission. So what would be the modeling in that that you've used to
determine that figure?
Just roughly our membership size.
But,
having thought about it,
I think actually having that number i- in the bill as
a sort of prerequisite, it misses the point around the
risk. The risk isn't about the numbers, the risk is about the direct
supervision. And I think the bill will become a lot stronger if it focused
on, is the group being properly supervised?
And you might have a ratio of, say, there must be,
if you want to take advantage of these provisions, one supervisor
for 12 workers,
and also require that they work at different sites.
So it's not one big site where 200 people are working,
it's a lot of small sites. So my submission is, as moves a
little bit, I'd actually take away the number and-
Right
... put it into direct supervision, because that makes a lot more sense.
Yeah.
You can just see the WorkSafe inspector coming along, going, "You've got 21."
You know what I mean?
Yeah. We've, I think, heard that quite a bit throughout the submissions.
Hey, on that then,
and this is
something I want to get my head around, too, you're a
oversight organization. So if that
were increased or changed-
Yes
... what would you expect your members to voluntarily
maintain to ensure
safety standards remain high? So there must be something that you have thought
about in that space.
So,
as you appreciate, all the business in New Zealand have really high standards now
because of the current legislation.
Yeah.
Our expectation when it comes to health and safety,
work safety,
is to meet the, not only the minimum New Zealand legal standard,
but to go further in terms of worker care.
Our name is quite lofty, Ethical Employers.
Mm.
Our real focus is in
employment and best
practice employment for the workers so that we're not
exploiting. That's our real drive.
But part of that, of course, is keeping the workers safe.
And so we expect our employers, and we do audit, to
go beyond what the minimum legal requirements are.
And we've got no problem with providing WorkSafe with information or anything
that they want,
because what we're trying to do is lift the performance of all
contractors in the country.
Yeah. Oh, look, that's super helpful. Thanks, Mike.
Thank you, Mike. It doesn't appear that we have any further questions, but as I
mentioned earlier, it's a very topical point that you make, so we really
appreciate your contribution.
Thank you very much for hearing me.
Thank you.
Okay. If we have now, APEX and NZRDA
Unions available online, we'll move next to them.
Welcome, Natalia de Souza. We've 10 minutes for your
submission, and that includes time for questions.
Thank you. Nga mihi nui kia koutou.
Thank you for the opportunity to represent our submission to the
Select Committee. As mentioned, I am representing both
APEX and the RDA Unions, and collectively, we represent
over 8,500, close to 9,000 employees in the health
sector.And that spans allied health and resident
doctors employed in both public and private sectors.
Having taken our submission as read, there are two things we'd like to briefly
emphasize here. First, we think the bill is wrongly
prioritizing the reduction of compliance costs over the
meaningful reduction of harm, injuries, and fatalities.
In high-stakes environment like healthcare, these costs of
complying with legislation are actually essential investments
that keep our workers safe, healthy, and able to continue
the quite literally life-saving work they do.
So obviously this has natural flow on implications then for things like patient
safety.
And second, and importantly, we see the most dangerous part of this
bill being the narrow defined list of critical
risks which exclude musculoskeletal injuries and
psychosocial hazards, which of course, can give rise to things like
workplace violence and bullying, slips, trips and falls,
and even fatigue. And all of these are, unfortunately, commonplace
and an everyday reality for many healthcare workers.
Our main point is that failing to prevent these risks doesn't actually save any
money, it's simply shifting the cost, which we estimate at billions
if we look at Australian statistics.
Shifting those costs onto the public health system, ACC, and the
taxpayer ultimately. The bottom line is health and safety is
part and parcel of a good business model, and we shouldn't be
incentivizing poor business practices, which have proven to increase
workplace harm, increase cost to the economy, and reduce
productivity,
to what end?
Thank you, and I'm open to taking any questions.
Wonderful. Thank you, Natalia. It doesn't appear that we have any questions from...
Oh, we do. We have a question from Jan Tinizzi.
Sorry, Natalia. I was just
trying to find the raise hand function.
But can you sort of delve into that?
You talked about the ACC, and that's something that
many submitters have actually come before and talked about the increased
risks. Do you see for your organization and your members
that that is probably,
like that's quite big with the risks
and that that they're facing in their work
throughout that time, and do you see that there's an integral
part of this bill... Well, this is what I'm trying to get my head around.
So I'm not trying to lead, and I'm happy for you to come and say no,
but is there a real integral part of
ACC there that the bill is not covering at the moment?
Yeah, look, thank you for that question.
It's really an interesting one in healthcare in particular.
So I mentioned it in the submission, but I can talk to here that probably the
three most common big psychosocial risks we see in health
are things like musculoskeletal injuries, so particularly for our
sonographers who are doing ultrasounds, but also our radiographers.
Things like workplace stress and fatigue
from high workloads and understaffing.
And then of course, things like workplace violence and bullying, both from patients
and their whanau, but also from other employees as well.
So if we take any one of those examples, even something like sonography,
where, I can give you an example where we had a sonographer who was
starting to
get really achy and starting to have a lot of wrist and shoulder pain
because of the repetitive scanning.
Even something like going in there and saying, "Hey, how about
varying scanning patterns?" So a really small shift so that they're not doing the
same scan over and over again can reduce some of those injuries.
Now, if that were to escalate, obviously you'd see costs through ACC because
it's a workplace injury claim. Similar with, we've seen
countless cases of people who have experienced workplace bullying and
harassment, and where that hasn't been resolved, and they've been forced to
take time off or even leave eventually.
Again, many of them don't feel ready or immediately ready to return
to work. And so there's ACC costs there in terms of actually
supporting their
return to work in terms of their stress to the point where they may not even be
able to return to work. So there's a number of examples of how these
costs are simply just externalized through other agencies.
Even things like bullying, where if we can't prevent it through health and safety
legislation, it will simply end up in the ERA, in the Employment Relations
Authority or courts and clog up those systems even further.
So the real sort of superpower, I suppose, of the health and safety
legislation is to actually try and prevent a lot of those risks
from compounding, from escalating before they come with those greater
costs.
That's really interesting, and it's the unintended consequences that,
I guess, I'm trying to get to, and as a committee, we're trying to get to the
bottom of so that we don't allow that to happen.
But I guess I've got a question then.
In the current legislation, what's not working in the current
legislation now, in your opinion, for your members?
Or what
could go further in that legislation to make it even tighter for them?
I mean, look, there's probably quite a lot.
I'd say one is, regardless, we'd need to strengthen our
focus on psychosocial risk and minimization and prevention.
But I think the other really important lever that already exists in the
legislation is things like worker participation.
And what we find is across public sector, they tend to be a little more in
place. There tends to be policies and practices around it, but not so
much in private sector and smaller employers.
And so if we can try and find ways of increasing that
key worker participation function, then it'll be really important.
I mean, studies have shown that where we see greater worker participation,
we see better health and safety outcomes.
So just involving the employees on the ground, they're probably, in a lot of times,
really best placed to actually know what's the most dangerous or risky part of
their job, or the part of the job that's really causing a lot of concerns.
And having their involvement or voice in it is invaluable.
Madam Chair, can I ask another question on that?
Sure.
Thank you. So the ACOTS in this bill then
looks like that they're bringing that in, and I think that's a part of the bill
that most of us can agree is quite a good part.
Do you think that goes far enough
for that worker participation, or do you think that there needs to be,
particularly from your members' point of view, another way of doing that?
Yeah, look, I think it's more about how we actually put worker participation into
practice. So that's one part of it.
Now, I know that initially, when the bill was introduced, worker
participation was only required in organizations that had, say, more than 20
employees, and now that's gone away. So that's really helpful, that's fantastic.
More guidance from the regulator around how employers can actually put that
into place would be excellent. The ACOTS themselves, look, they're a really
valuable introduction in this bill, particularly the
ability for other representatives, so whether that's employee or employer
representatives, to have input into developing and shaping that, so that's
fantastic. However, we do see risks of actually using that as
a, "Well, we complied with our duties," in court kind of
thing. So what we argue is that it should be a floor rather than
a ceiling, and there's lots of room to actually make improvements on
approved codes of practice, and try and keep up with what
the current risks are as well, because, of course, those codes won't always be
super current or relevant.
Oh, look, that's super helpful. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Natalia.
Thank you.
I really appreciate your contribution to this process.
And we'll move on now to our next-
Thank you.
Right. We now have Physiotherapy New Zealand
joining us.
We have Kirsten Davey and Simon Hoare.
We'd love to see your faces.
Oh.
Wonderful. Good morning.
There we go.
Yeah. We have 10 minutes with you this morning, and we're running a little ahead of
time, so thank you for being agile.
And that does include time for questions.
That's over to you how you utilize the time, and you can start now.
Brilliant. Thank you very much. And just wanted to... Can you hear me okay?
Wonderfully.
Perfect. Great. Well, thank you very much for allowing us the opportunity to
speak. We are presenting on behalf of Physiotherapy New Zealand, and in
particular, our occupational health special interest group.
My name is Simon Hoare, I'm the CEO.
Hoare. Kirsten Davey, I'm
president of Physiotherapy New Zealand. Nice to be here.
Thank you for this opportunity.
Great.
So look, physiotherapists daily deal with the effects of
workplace injuries, and in particular musculoskeletal injuries,
musculoskeletal conditions. So physiotherapists work
in the workplace and clinics with employers
and employees to mitigate the significant cost and impact
of musculoskeletal harm on businesses, on individuals,
and on society as well. So I'll just hand over to Kirsten now to talk a little bit
more in detail about that.
So I think picking up and emphasizing the main points that are in
our submission. We do have concerns around that
critical risks, that terminology, that how the bill narrows that
focus in a way that sort of risks worsening New Zealand's
largest source of workplace harm, which is those
musculoskeletal conditions, which is, of course,
who physiotherapists are dealing with on a daily
basis. So shifting that attention toward critical
risk sort of inherently implies workplaces can
place less attention on minor injuries,
which the musculoskeletal injuries tend to fall
into. And those are workers who are undertaking manual
handling, repetitive tasks, sustained physical load.
They contribute to musculoskeletal injuries, those
sprains, strains, back injuries.
And yet musculoskeletal harm is not minor.
And if we look at some of the ACC costs, musculoskeletal
injuries make up 75% of
ACC work injury costs. So it's the dominant
and growing cost, placing growing burdens on the individual, so on the
worker, which we're really concerned about, on our
funders, and on employers and productivity, and
therefore New Zealand as a whole.
We're concerned that this risk will continue to escalate with significant
long-term harm consequences for workers, and that health
system generally.
So our thoughts are that the definition of critical risk
becomes risky, particularly for small PCBUs.
And note the prescriptive definition is no longer current
practice and has been sort of abandoned years ago by
Australia and the UK, whose rates of harm in the
workplace for musculoskeletal conditions is certainly much lower.
We also note that other areas of significant risk,
such as psychosocial hazards, may not be captured in
that critical risks area. And that's, again, another area
that physiotherapists work in. Mental health is another huge
area, just like your previous presenter was talking
about.I'll hand back to Simon to-
Yeah. So I suppose, we're trying to keep it brief.
So, that proposed shift risks, in our view, weakening the
regulatory oversight in a time when musculoskeletal harm
already lacks a bit of visibility.
So that increased emphasis on guidance and reduced enforcement makes it
difficult to see how this will make businesses take this seriously, and
obviously health and safety is very, very important.
And so our members, so members of Physiotherapy New Zealand, already have some
concerns after the disbandment of WorkSafe's Human Factors and
Ergonomics team, which had a focus on
musculoskeletal harm.
So I think what we're trying to highlight is, I think the
proposed bill risks compromising some of the objectives by
prioritizing only critical risks.
And we'd like to see sort of that broader review alongside ACC,
alongside health, alongside social welfare and MB
to assess those impacts. I think we all know that we're really lucky to have
this legislation to protect workers.
And so we want to ensure that any changes don't have unintended
consequences by narrowing that focus to just critical risks,
when we know that musculoskeletal harm and musculoskeletal injuries are
the sort of largest workforce harm area.
So we want to make sure that we protect the workers, the businesses, and
New Zealand as a whole.
We'll open up to questions. And Jan, see that you've got your hand...
Ooh, we've got a couple of hands up there.
Yes, we have. So look,
if you don't mind, or just we like to go based on who
puts their hands up first.
Yeah.
So Jan will go lead off, and then we'll have Dr. Panjit Palmer.
Thank you, and thank you for your submission.
Now, I'm looking over this way because I've got your submission on another screen
here. And in your submission, you do express
concern about the proposed shift towards greater
guidance and less enforcement. I've got two questions
based on that, if that's okay with Madam Chair, with that.
From your experience working with injured workers and
workplaces, how important,
in your experience, is the regulatory enforcement in driving
meaningful prevention of musculoskeletal harm?
I'll answer that one, because I do work out in,
with employers, so I'm well-placed.
Look, I think the majority of New Zealand employers
are
trying to do a good job for their employees.
They are aware of their legislative
responsibilities, but there can be
confusion, and it is important that the legislation is
streamlined and this sort of distinction between
critical risk and
orientation towards that could create more confusion, especially for those
smaller organizations. And we know New Zealand is made up 90%
of small organizations. And physiotherapy practices
alike, and I'm a physiotherapy practice owner.
So,
the will and intent is there. I think having
legislation that's streamlined, that's clear,
that
gives good guidance is important.
Thank you.
That is how I find employers.
Do I have time, Madam Chair?
If it's quick, yes.
Thank you. So you-
Where's the question?
In the same part you refer to the disbandment of WorkSafe's Human Factors
and Ergonomics team.
Yeah.
Can you give me an impact on if this has had an impact on the
ability of the regulators to identify high-risk
musculoskeletal environments or systemic workplace issues?
Well, certainly our members who were involved
have seen a change in that ability
for
really employers having that focus on
that manual handling, repetitive task.
Just that
awareness, that streamline, they have noticed, our
occupational health group have noticed a difference.
And that's why we've called that out in our submission, that it's
not as clear. Having
the more information and guidance that can be given,
the better. So when you have that stepping back of those sorts of committees,
that just becomes challenging,
and has an impact at the workforce,
at the coal face. Simon, you might-
Yeah. Look, what I was going to say is, as you know, all different businesses
function in all different ways, and so you need that sort of portfolio of different
things to tackle different parts of it.
And so when you start losing some of the focus in the legislation, you start losing
some of those teams. I think the risk is you start to create an
opportunity for things to get missed by businesses.
So I think just that overall weakening, the sort of shift in focus
is what we're concerned about.
Thank you.
Right. Can I move on now to the question we have from Dr. Panjit Palmer?
Thank you. So first I want to say thank you to you for sharing your
concerns based on your professional experience.
And can I, my overall question is about understanding then
how do we approach the main objective here.
So the main objective is to kind of not go with that all-risk
approach, because we want to balance it with the need of compliance
on small PCBUs, because small PCBUs have limited
resources and capacity. So how do we, if we
include the concerns that you have expressed in the legislation,
then how do we ensure that we are able to manage that as well, balancing
the all-risk approach versus the compliance requirement from small
businesses kind of thing?
And look, as a small business owner, I understand and applaud
your intent here around trying to reduce
compliance. But,
I-The concern then
becomes that we then lose sight of
a big risk. Just because it's not a critical risk doesn't mean it's not
a big risk. Critical risk in looking at people that are going
to suffer serious harm. But we also know that a whole lot of
small missed smaller
injuries can indicate that there
could be a more major injury about to occur, and
that's clear. So missing those smaller injuries, not taking
so much notice of them, not having a focus on them, I think,
does leave the worker, and more importantly, the employees
exposed. So how do we do that? Well, from
our point of view, MSK injuries and psychosocial are both
really important, and they mightn't fall under your definition.
Does it reduce compliance costs by not focusing on those
from an employer's point of view? From my point of view, I'm not sure that it
does. So,
yeah. Simon, I don't know.
Thank you. Look, that's unfortunately all the time we've got with you this morning.
Oh, okay. All right. Thank you.
Thank you very much. We'll move on now.
We appreciate your contribution to this process.
And thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you.
Really appreciate it.
Wonderful.
We now have MINEX Health and Safety Council, Wayne
Scott.
Morning, Wayne. Welcome to the Select Committee and the hearing on the
Health and Safety at Work Amendment Bill.
We have 10 minutes with you.
You seem awfully far away, but that's the way your camera's set up, so hopefully we
can hear you, and that 10 minutes includes time for questions.
We'll pass it over to you.
Sorry about the set up of the camera.
I couldn't find a 12-year-old to help me this morning.
That's okay, we can hear you well. We can still see you.
Thanks. Thank you for your time today. I'm Wayne Scott.
I'm the Chief Executive of MINEX. We're the Health and Safety Council for the
extractive sector, which covers mining, quarrying and tunneling.
You read our submission, so I just wanted to pick up on a couple of points and
expand on those.
Firstly, while we support the core objective of the Bill, to strengthen
organizational focus on the workplace risks most capable of causing
death or serious harm, the inclusion of Schedule 5 from the Mining
and Quarrying Regulations in Schedule 1A of the Bill may
lead to sites focusing on this list of risks rather than determining the
fatal hazards within their own businesses.
Schedule 5 was introduced to the Mining and Quarrying Regulations as a list of
notifiable events, not as an assessment of critical risks in the
sector.
Our sector is very familiar with the concept of fatal hazards and the use of
critical control management systems to identify critical controls,
define performance criteria, and verify that controls are effective.
Our experience across large and small businesses is that serious incidents
rarely occur because hazards were unknown.
They occur when the controls intended to manage those hazards failed.
There is a danger that the current wording of the Bill encourages businesses to
focus solely on identifying critical risks and not on controlling
them effectively. Knowing your critical risks is not enough.
Businesses need to identify, maintain, and verify the controls that
are critical to preventing fatal or life-altering harm.
Another concern we have is that the proposed critical risk definition does not
consider that there is potential of fatal harm to workers from latent
hazards such as fatigue, exposure to severe weather, and other
workplace psychosocial hazards.
WorkSafe New Zealand determined in a review of suicides from 2017 to
2021 that 12% of suicides met the criteria of being
work-related.
These hazards can have a cumulative effect on workers over time, leading to
accidents and incidents that cause harm.
Under the Health and Safety at Work Act, health includes both
physical and mental health, and PCBUs must manage
psychosocial risks in the same way as any other serious risk.
We are concerned that under these changes, PCBUs will not need to manage
these hazards, and workers will be seriously harmed over time as a result.
We strongly support the greater use of codes of practice as our sector has
benefited from both our own regulations and significant
guidance, both from WorkSafe and our industry associations.
These documents are resource-intensive to develop, but deliver real
benefits in providing clarity to PCBUs.
It is important that WorkSafe is resourced to develop these documents in a timely
manner, and that simple processes are developed for WorkSafe endorsement of
industry-led codes of practice. I'm happy to take questions.
Wonderful. Thank you. It appears we have a question from Jan Tinetti.
Kia ora, and thanks, Wayne. I was particularly interested in this submission
because, of course,
you've got such high-risk factors within the industry,
and I really appreciate those areas that you've
identified. But looking at your submission, I wanted to ask
a couple of questions around the small business carve-out that you've
mentioned in your submission as well.
Yep.
You
argue that the small business carve-out is unworkable where
multiple PCBUs operate together.
Have you got concrete examples of that within mining or quarrying,
where differing duties would create gaps or conflicts in
risk control?
Yeah, we have, particularly some of the larger mining sites where there could be
multiple contractors on site.
We've also had it on some of our
smaller quarry sites where tyre fitters will come on site
or there'll be other PCBUs operating on site,
and there has often been-Should we say misunderstandings between
what's required
of the different PCBUs and who's responsible for what.
We have got some clarity within our
regulations. So we're one of the sectors that's lucky to have our own regulations,
so there is a little bit of clarity there.
Yeah.
But our concern is that these changes, particularly when you
take an arbitrary number and say 19's small and 21's
large, I just think some of those things could create some
unintended consequences where you have multiple PCBUs on
sites.
Thank you. And just on the small PCBUs, you did note in your
submission that small PCBUs experience higher
injury rates, and just how we can make that stronger in
the legislation. Do you attribute that primarily to capability
and resourcing or regulatory settings?
And how would your proposed amendments address the root causes?
I don't think it's so much the
regulatory settings. I think it's the ability of organizations
at a certain scale to understand what's expected of them.
And I think the minister has talked about that a bit in relation to this bill.
Yeah.
I don't know, though, that these changes are actually going to do that.
What we found
with our regulations that were post-Pipe River, you know, in 2015-
Yeah
... that the greater degree of clarity really helped those
small businesses,
and in fact, at the time, they were a little bit concerned about
the greater regulatory burden, but in fact, they've benefited from that.
And I think if we asked those small businesses now,
they would say they've really benefited from having that greater direction.
Oh, that's look super helpful from my perspective. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Wayne. We do appreciate your contribution to this process.
And very thoughtful and fulsome submission.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
And we'll move on now to the Hazels Miller Foundation.
We have Anne Miller and Mike again with us.
Mike O'Brien.
Good morning. And do we have-- Oh, we do have Mike O'Brien on the call
with us.
Yes.
Just wait for the speaker.
Get you to turn your camera on. Wonderful. There we go.
Try that. Hopefully that's much better.
Beautiful. That's okay. Hi again, Mike.
You are with us for 10 minutes again this morning, and that includes time for
questions, and the time is over to you now.
Wonderful. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
And I come to you with a different hat on today, and that is
of the Hazels Miller Foundation. We had
hoped that we could get one of our fellow trustees, Gregor Costa,
to attend, but unfortunately, he was unavailable this morning.
And so I'm stepping in to support Anne Miller, who is a fellow
trustee, who will speak on behalf of the Hazels Miller Foundation.
My role is as chair of the foundation.
We're an
independent charitable trust established in 2024 with the
support of the Miller family. Our purpose is public
benefit, not representation.
We don't advocate for employers, workers, or professional
members. Our focus is on education and training for people working
in, on entering, and the health and safety sector,
building workforce capability and capacity, and improving public
health and safety outcomes through consistent evidence-based
practice. Our goal
from a fundraising perspective, is to raise sufficient funds
to put in substantive scholarships and educational
capability
over the next 100 years. And we're on a
pathway to raise to approximately $5 million, which will give
us the ability to put 30 to 50 scholarships in-market and
raise the capability of the workforce
for every year for 100 years. So that's our goal.
And so we're trying to really make a difference to education.
I'll hand over to Anne.
Thanks. Thank you, and
dear members,
for this opportunity.
It would help if I explain that
we
gave the money because my brother was into occupational hygiene,
and was
a visionary, and he used to tell me what he was seeing New Zealand would
be like in 30 years' time. And his vision was for New Zealand to
be self-sufficient in health and safety, that you didn't need to go
to Britain for the qualifications, or America, or anywhere
else.
And part of the reason that as soon as we knew he had passed, that was what we
decided we wanted something to be a lasting
effect because he loved New Zealand.
He had been here 17 years or something like that.
And lots of people knew him because he was kind of famous.
So that's kind of the background of where we're coming from.
We were brought up in hospitality, so health and safety was part and
parcel of our remit, because
hospitality, your food poisoning,
falls, you name it, it happens.
So that's the background. So what mattered to him was people
having the knowledge and capability to keep themselves and others safe.
Decisions being grounded in evidence and sound practice.
Systems that encourage learning, ongoing improvements,
and lasting results instead of focusing on compliance.
He was very much into teaching and getting people to have that education.
The Miller Foundation exists to carry those values forward.
That is why we focus on education, workforce development, and building
system capability. It's also why we get involved with
legislation that affects how health and safety are understood and put
into practiceWe made this submission because in
our view, legislation shapes behavior in ways that go well
beyond what is written.
It influences what people believe health and safety includes, what
knowledge and skills are seen as necessary, or whether
organizations invest in building capability at all.
Legislative change alone does not reduce harm.
Harm is reduced when people understand risks, know what good
looks like, and are supported to apply
consistently. This is the
perspective we have taken in looking at this bill.
Our overall message is we support the reform that strengthens
clarity, focus, and consistency in the health and safety
system. We are concerned that some parts of the
bill as currently written could unintentionally weaken
capability, especially by reducing clarity for
educators and practitioners,
narrowing the perceived scope of health and safety,
and sending unhelpful signals about what learning and competence
matter, especially in small businesses.
Our recommendations focus on refinement to ensure that the bill delivers the
outcome it is intended to achieve over the long term.
Key point of prioritizing the
critical risk. We support prioritizing risk that can result in
death or serious harm. That aligns well with contemporary safety
practice and education. However, from an educational and
assessment point of view, the current definition of critical
risk relies on whether harm is likely,
and that introduces interpretive
uncertainty. That uncertainty makes it harder to teach
consistently, assess competence, and provide clear
advice, particularly to small or resourceful constrained
PCBUs.
We're also concerned that the bill focuses on identifying critical
risks but does not put enough emphasis on identifying and checking
critical controls. This is important because education and
training have the most impact in this area.
What success looks like as a definition
can be
consistently taught across qualifications and guidance and
explicitly links critical risks to critical
controls.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Sorry, we've just had a little bit more and then-
Oh, please. Carry on
... yeah, so I'll just-
Just to know, we've only got three minutes left, so if you could-
Okay.
That's okay. But it looks like we only have one question, so you go for gold.
No, no problem. Probably the couple of other things were
small PCBU provisions and capability.
We're just thinking about this with a health lens in regards to reducing demand for
education, training, weakening engagement for occupational health and
psychological risks, and discouraging early intervention for
long latency and cumulative harm.
And so we're really thinking about
just how a two-tier system makes
it harder to design consistent education programs, develop transferable
skills, and sustain a capable workforce pipeline across sectors and business
sizes. Our main point there is proportionality works best through
flexible guidance and education, not by lowering expectations in the law itself.
We do have some other points around approved codes of practice and just the
complexity that that will create, but I won't go into that detail.
And the last point I'd mention is Derek Miller
was in New Zealand for about 20-odd years, really
leading occupational hygiene, so focused on
exposure and exposure monitoring over an extensive period of
time, and working not only to support New
Zealand businesses but also in the international community.
And Anne is just calling in from Scotland, so unfortunately, Derek passed away
a few years ago. Jan, you had a question.
As long as that's okay with Madam Chair.
Yep.
Sorry, Madam Chair.
Yeah, no worries. These online meetings are a bit tricky.
Yeah.
Go for it, Jan.
I just wanted to just very quickly ask
about that two-tier duty framework that you've opposed.
So you've opposed it from a capability perspective.
Do you believe that there are alternative legislative or policy
mechanisms that could achieve the proportionality without
reducing baseline expectations?
Yeah, I'm just trying to really think that through.
The challenge we think that
separating these two things out
mean that there's going to be real challenges and
when I look at SMEs right now, they really struggle to
understand their health and safety obligations.
And, so their approved codes of practice and guidelines will be really
helpful for that. So that part of it's really helpful.
But when you start separating out
their risks and what they need to focus on and risks of the wider system,
it creates quite a lot of confusion.
And when you think about that from an educational perspective, it then
becomes very challenging to then improve education,
in an uncertain world. And so I think it just
creates more uncertainty rather than certainty, as
you have multiple different systems and different reasons for different people.
Jan, is that-
Yeah. No, that's actually very helpful. Thank you. Really appreciate that.
Okay.
Wonderful. Thank you very much, both of you.
Thank you, Anne, for joining us from-
Thank you
... Scotland.
Good evening to you.
Thank you.
And appreciate your contribution to this process. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
We'll move on now to a submitter, David Lillis.
Okay. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can, David. Welcome.
Okay.
We have five minutes with you this morning.
Thank you.
That does include time for questions, so we'll pass this over to you now.
Okay. Thank you. Well, thank you for the chance to present today,
to draw attention to a gap between the intent of the
bill and the reality of both public and private workplaces.
Amongst other research, the 2025 Public Service
Census reported workplace bullying across the public service at
12.1% of workers. In Statistics New Zealand's Survey of
Working Life of 2018, some 300,000
people reported bullying, and in 2022, Dr
Bevan Catley reported an overall prevalence of 18%.
Certainly it is present within education, where I have worked, including our
universities. So bullying remains pervasive despite
education and repeated media exposure, and too many people suffer
career and reputational damage and psychosocial damage as a
result. Now, recognizing a degree of subjectivity
in identifying and reporting bullying, and also recognizing the
difficulty of creating pragmatic and workable legislation,
clearly, more effective standards and expectations are necessary.
Now, the act defines health as including both physical and mental
health, but mental health is hardly discussed there.
It specifies standards relating to physical, biological and chemical
hazards, but is silent on the most pervasive hazard,
systemic psychosocial harm. In turn, the bill
redefines critical risks and specifies the duties of officers.
Of course, persons conducting a business or undertaking must
prioritize critical risks but manage all risks.
The bill limits the power of revising new Schedule 1A
to an amendment relating to any hazard that is consistent with the bill's
definition of critical risk. In other words, a risk that is associated with a
hazard described in Schedule 1A of the Act, or a hazard that could
result in a death or notifiable injury, illness, or incident.
However,
legislation that covers workplace harm remains inadequate if it fails
to discuss mental health and fails to classify severe bullying
as a statutory critical risk.
The bill seeks to clarify and bound the diligence duties of officers
such as chief executives and directors.
However, chief executives in human resources already use the
existing framework to maintain plausible deniability
regarding toxic workplace cultures, essentially covering up.
If the bill constrains the scope of officer duties inappropriately,
it will act to insulate senior leadership from accountability, allowing
them to classify bullying as an operational issue rather than a failure of
governance.
Bullying brings fiscal as well as psychosocial implications.
In other words, financial waste. Currently, the Crown
manages the consequences of bullying partly through health and safety
interventions, but also through confidential settlements and
non-disclosure agreements. However, using taxpayer
money to fund confidential settlements is a gross misuse of
public funds. It obscures the true scale of psychosocial
harm from both WorkSafe New Zealand and the Office of the
Auditor-General, and thereby
provides protection that allows serial
perpetrators to move between government agencies.
Curiously, neither the act nor the bill mention
human resources.
I propose six recommendations before the bill proceeds to its second
reading. One, agree on a clear definition of workplace
bullying for use within the act, such as the definition used by both Employment
New Zealand and WorkSafe New Zealand, involving
repeated and unreasonable behavior that can cause physical or
mental harm. Two, list severe psychosocial
harm and persistent workplace bullying explicitly as
critical risks under the new Schedule 1A of the bill.
Three, introduce liability for extreme cases of workplace
bullying, and for chief executives who fail repeatedly to act on
known systemic bullying.
Four, include a termination policy for proven bullies within the public
sector in order to end the present culture of recycling of
perpetrators. Five, include a clause that prohibits the
use of confidential settlements,
thus ensuring full
transparency, effective external auditing, and fiscal
responsibility. Six, include a clause specifying
that the roles of human resources are not only to support management, but
also to ensure that workers are engaged, productive, and
supported. This bill must be extended to
include mental health and bullying as health and safety concerns.
Doing so would signal that government acknowledges that the problem exists
and takes it seriously. Finally, I draw your attention to
the presentation from Alan House of Culture Safe New
Zealand later this morning, perhaps around
10:40 a.m. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Unfortunately, we don't have any time for questions with you,
David, but we do appreciate your very detailed submission and your
contribution to this process.
Thank you.
Right. We'll move on now to the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society of
New Zealand. Joanne Crawford, we have you now for 10
minutes.
Joanne, good morning. That time includes time for questions.
Thank you.
And we do
look forward to hearing from you. The time starts now.
Thank you very much
for having me back this morning. I'm here today as the chair of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society in New Zealand.
And-Our society is a professional society which promotes
the application of human factors and ergonomics to the design of
work, work systems, and workplaces through the application
of science and research.
We do support the intent to improve clarity to the bill and
focus on serious harm, but we have some real concerns, and we'd like to
advocate for a balanced, evidence-based, system-level
approach.
In terms of the critical risk focus,
it shifts from balanced risk management to critical risks
only, and we have real concerns about that.
Chronic harm creates
the
majority of injuries and long-term costs and long-term
disability in New Zealand.
Musculoskeletal disorders, work-related musculoskeletal disorders, are
27% of New Zealand's burden of harm,
and there is a potential there, if we take any focus off that,
that's going to increase our claims costs to ACC.
But there's also psychosocial risks,
where we see these as being
deprioritized. And psychosocial harm is often as a
result of how work is designed, led, resourced, and changed.
I think the emphasis is that catastrophic events are
fortunately rare, but chronic
musculoskeletal and psychosocial harms are widespread, costly, and
preventable.
With regard to SMEs,
certain sectors of SMEs have higher rates of
serious and fatal injuries,
and doing a carve-out for SMEs is likely to remove
protections for a large number of our workers.
So
it's important to understand that SMEs need support, not reduced
obligations, especially in our higher risk
sectors.
In relation to the WorkSafe rebalance, there's a real concern that
downgrading enforcement weakens the system.
It reduces deterrence and contradicts regulatory best
practice. And let's go back to the Pike River inquiry, it
identified weak enforcement as a root cause.
So it's important that education and enforcement must
work together. Removing balance undermines safety outcomes.
So our recommendations in terms of strengthening the bill is prioritize
prevention of all harms. Those include the psychosocial,
the musculoskeletal, and the other occupational health risks.
We have to retain worker engagement, representation, and enforcement as
main functions.
We'd like to see the removal of the SME carve-out, where we need to
provide
targeted support instead,
ensuring WorkSafe is adequately funded and capable, because they're likely to
be the source of that support.
And actually think about long-term legal certainty.
Fewer prosecutions, less case law to draw on.
So we're trying to present changes that are
practical, evidence-based, and essential for a modern,
effective safety system.
And I'll be happy to take any questions.
Thank you very much, Joanne. It appears we have a question from Jan Tinetti.
Thanks. Thanks, Joanne, and thank you for your submission.
In reading it, I was particularly interested in the
critical risk prioritization in section three purpose changes
that you talked about. From your organization's standpoint,
what are the main practical difficulties that
PCBUs would face in determining
whether a risk is critical under this proposed framework?
And I'm particularly interested in the
main difficulties they'd face when they are determining
cumulative or repetitive exposures in
psychosocial and organizational hazards, as you've
outlined in your submission.
Thanks for the question.
I think what happens is that we see a
focus immediately going, let's say, back to
safety issues and critical risk, where,
yeah, rightly so, they have to be managed.
But that focus tends to be on
preventing fatalities and preventing
serious injuries, which is right.
But if we only focus on that, we're going to start ignoring the
musculoskeletal, the psychosocial risks.
And these, in their own way,
I think, looking at our history in the last sort of 10
years, these in a way get sidelined.
"Oh, it's a bit of back pain, it's a bit of stress." And it's like, well, actually,
some of these things cause life-changing issues.
So we've really got to think about, how do we manage that?
If you're a large organization, you're probably going to have been resourced
well for your health and safety.
So managing those more chronic risks
is there. You're still going to be required to do that.
And when I think about
what a small SME has to do,
and they're the backbone of most countries' SMEs,
sometimes identifying a critical risk isn't an easy question.
Yeah.
You're going to need some support to do that.
And whilst there's some prescription written as part of that bill, I suspect
it's going to go out of date very quickly,
because work changes, what we do changes.
So I think we really need to be clear about
how are SMEs going to be supported to make those
decisions.
Yeah, and I was really interested in what you had to say about that in the
submission around the fact that, and I guess I'll
ask, how do you
view the risk that
what we're going to be calling non-critical hazards, such as fatigue,
workload, poor work design, may act as contributors
to critical incidents even when they're not treated
as critical risks themselves?
Yes. And that's the important thing, is that
you're running a small business, you're probably putting everything into
it. You are going to be tired. You're going to be working long hours.
But is the risk acknowledged?
Yeah.
And
we've got to get,
I think, taking a whole systems approach, balanced.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Very much, Joanne. We do appreciate your contribution to this process.
Thank you.
It's been very helpful to have your submission, so thank you very much.
We'll move on now to our next submitter.
We have
the Energy Resources Aotearoa.
We have John Carnegie and James Caldwell joining us.
Welcome, James. I do believe we've also got John online.
Thank you. John Carnegie
There we go. James, it sounds like your audio is not that
strong.
But hopefully, we can still hear you.
How about me, Chair?
Yeah, John, yours is loud and clear.
Yeah. Good. Sorry, I was just taking a moment to figure out the technology, so
That's okay.
Right. We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
That does include time for questions, so it's over to you how you utilize that.
And we'll hand it over.
Great. Well, thank you, Chair, and thank you, committee, for
the opportunity to speak to our submission.
I'm John Carnegie, I'm Chief Executive of Energy Resources Aotearoa,
and with me is James Caldwell, our Policy Director, Upstream and Environment.
A little about who we are. We're New Zealand's peak energy advocacy
organization, representing the entire energy value chain,
and we exist to enable constructive collaboration
across the energy sector. And our members have a common interest in
robust public policy settings, and our focus is advocating
for
systemic solutions across the energy sector and the wider economy.
We have separately provided the committee with a
high-level snapshot of our view of the various key elements of the bill.
This summarizes our submission at a high level, and look, I won't talk to that
directly.
Rather, I'll spend a few minutes quickly running through our main points.
First off, I want to state very clearly and unequivocally that worker
safety is not, and should never be traded off as a point of
competitive advantage.
Safety is the top priority of the sector, and there are no
trade-offs between savings and safety, so we support
cost-effective risk management that does not compromise
safety. It must be a win-win for both.
And this is borne out by our safety record.
There have been no major accidents involving fatalities in the 50-year
history of the upstream oil and gas sector operating in New
Zealand, and oil and gas workers are safer and
suffer less accidents in total per worker than all
other primary industries in New Zealand.
And we, of course, work extremely hard every day to keep it that way.
We support the bill and the intent to reduce unnecessary
compliance costs, increase certainty for businesses, and sharpen the
focus of the regime on the prevention of serious harm.
It is widely acknowledged that there are issues with the current work, health, and
safety system.
Businesses report are not always being sure how to meet their
obligations,
the regulator's strategy has sometimes been unclear and inconsistent,
and there has been insufficient focus on offering advice, guidance, or addressing
critical risks. And so while we are supportive of the bill, we have some
concerns that we believe should be addressed.
We have concerns about the carve-out of non-critical
risks for small PCBUs in relation to our
sector.
We believe it risks creating a two-tier system that could
undermine supply chain consistency, increase risks for contractors,
and effectively shift the compliance burden to large
businesses, adding costs for no tangible net benefit.
And I want to dig into these issues just a little bit more.
In the energy resources sector, employers from small
businesses typically work alongside employees from larger ones,
often as contractors or subcontractors in high-hazard
workplaces, such as petroleum production stations.
The smaller businesses are also integrated into many supply chains.
And so in these circumstances, it's clear that critical risks must be managed by
everyone. But it is less clear what responsibilities larger
PCBUs have for non-critical risks faced
for small PCBUs working for or with them,
potentially, we believe, creating governance gaps across
shared work sites. And we anticipate that the compliance burden
will simply fall on larger businesses, adding costs through
measures like assurance and guidance, and undermining the overall goal of
reducing the regulatory burden, as smaller businesses may be
disadvantaged if they can't meet the requirements in favor of larger
onesThat can.
And we also believe that there will be issues when workers and leaders transfer
from smaller organizations to larger ones, having learnt
their trade with a different set of rules.
The tiered approach based solely on headcount
should, we believe, be reconsidered, particularly in relation to work in
high-hazard sectors such as ours.
And the bill could instead require consistent risk management
expectations across supply chains based on risk,
regardless of business size. And we also have some concerns about the
proposed definition of critical risk, which we have set out in our
submission.
Essentially, we support a consequence-based framing
focused on credible worst-case outcomes rather than
likelihood to better address low-frequency but
high-consequence events that occur in our sector.
In terms of our key proposals,
many approved codes of practice or ACOPS are out of date and not fit for
purpose,
adding unnecessary costs that could limit the life of petroleum
fields when we are in desperate need of more domestic gas.
We support the new process allowing organizations to propose new and amended
ACOPS, but we consider its effectiveness will be limited
unless some issues are addressed.
First, the government needs to ensure the regulator is adequately resourced
to support this important process.
And second, the wide discretion of the regulator to progress these
proposals could also actually act as a
barrier. And we recommend that when industry develops a new draft
code of practice or a draft amendment, the regulator should be
obliged to submit the proposal to the minister.
Now, this doesn't imply, of course, that the minister or even the regulator must
agree, but if proposals might never be progressed, there will be
little incentive for industry to invest the time and effort in preparing them.
In relation to PCBU officer duties,
and we understand that the government's objective is that the respective duties of
management and directors are clear and well understood, and we
just want to give effect to that objective.
Now, we fully support directors and boards having appropriate duties and
obligations in relation to their governance roles, but they need to be
carefully and well defined, and the bill goes some way
towards
doing this in the due diligence steps.
But these could be further refined with greater detail.
Finally, to give businesses time to plan and implement the significant
changes required by the bill, we recommend a minimum transition
period of at least six months following Royal Assent.
So while we support the objectives of the bill, some changes need to be made
to meet the needs of our high-hazard sector and achieve the
bill's objectives. Now, this would include reframing how
critical risks are defined and replacing the carve-out for small
PCBUs with a consistent approach based on risk,
at least in relation to high-hazard sectors and work sites.
Now, WorkSafe also needs to be adequately resourced to support the changes,
particularly ACOP review and development.
Again, we thank the committee for the opportunity to present our submission,
and I look forward to answering any questions you may have in the remaining time.
Thank you.
Wonderful. Thank you very much, John, and thank you for your supplementary paper.
It's a really helpful document. We have our first question from Vanessa Wienink.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks very much for your submission and further
information. Just reading through that,
you made a suggestion that all the ACOPS should go to the minister.
Do you think that that would lead to slowing down or
potential for sort of some strange or outlandish
things to be recommended?
Oh, look, thanks for that. Look,
in our view, all industry participants actually have a shared interest in ensuring
that their sector operates effectively and efficiently, and it just
wouldn't be in the company's best interests to make unreasonable
proposals through this process.
They all want to maintain constructive relationships with
government officials and ministers, and there would be significant reputational
risk for them
if they went off-piste,
as it were, in that process.
But I guess the problem definition is if the regulator can effectively veto
proposals, there's little incentive for organizations to invest the
substantial time and money required to develop them.
And in any event, we don't want to prevent the regulator from
suggesting changes, and it will still make a recommendation,
and we just want there to be a transparent and accountable
path for getting the proposals to the minister.
Thank you. And we have a question from Dr. Parmjeet Parmar.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for your submission.
You suggest replacing headcount with proportionality test.
And just curious to understand how would that, in your view, work in practice,
and
what will be the criteria to determine
proportionality in a way which doesn't
overburden small businesses?
Yeah. Look, that's a really good question.
We think that in low-risk environments such as
hospitality, the carve-out may well work, but we just don't
think it will work in our sector,
where we believe that the burden will actually just fall on larger
PCBUs to ensure that all health and safety requirements are being met,
effectively just meaning that the cost of compliance shifts to them.
In terms of the specifics of your question,
of course, it's
an assessment of the balance of risks,
and so we suggest that
these risks
should-Be better defined based
on consequence and likelihood
rather than
headcount. James, do you have anything to add on that?
Yeah. I guess the proportionality could be in relation to the
risk level, and our particular concerns are about those high-risk
workplaces and where there is shared working
between
larger companies and smaller companies.
And just having clarity about what the responsibilities are
in those environments.
So, yeah, the test would be on the basis
of the level of risk.
Okay. Thank you very much. We do appreciate your contribution to the process and
a very fulsome submission. Thank you.
Yeah. Thanks, Chair.
Thank you for your time.
We will move on now to Business Canterbury.
Leanne Watson, appreciate you being online.
We are running a little ahead of schedule, which is
unusual in most cases.
Good morning.
Good morning, Leanne. Welcome. Thank you very much for making yourself available
for us. We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
Great.
And that includes time for questions, so I'll throw it over to you, and we
will
look forward to hearing your submission.
Great. Thank you. Thank you for your time this morning.
Business Canterbury is pleased to speak to our support of the Health and Safety at
Work Amendment Bill. We are here representing more than 2,800
businesses in the Canterbury region from Kaikoura to Ashburton and including the
West Coast, and we're the largest business support organization in the South
Island and the second-largest chamber of commerce in New Zealand, just to give you
some context there. As I mentioned before, we are supportive of this
bill, and we would like to thank Minister Van Velden and officials for the level of
consultation and genuine engagement with businesses in
Canterbury in its development. We have really appreciated that
active involvement. In particular, we support the bill's emphasis on
clarity, proportionality, and a renewed focus on preventing serious
harm through both education and enforcement.
By refocusing health and safety obligations on the management of critical risks,
the bill better aligns regulatory intent with practical risk management
and real-world safety outcomes.
I'd like to use my time today to comment on a few elements of the bill, two
which I'd like to ensure remain part of the bill as this committee considers it,
and two areas I think the bill could be further strengthened.
So firstly, the use of codes of practice.
This is an area where over time, through the development of more of them and
through faster development with the private sector and other organizations,
including unions being able to draft these, we will see the rising
tide lift all boats, and best practices through the use of approved codes of
practice used by smaller businesses who might not have higher
levels of capability or capacity in this space
otherwise. The status of a CoPs as
deemed compliance rather than simply evidence of compliance, we
believe will also strengthen their use as a tool and work in favor of
growth in the number being developed with businesses calling out for clarity and
best practice and not currently getting that from WorkSafe.
Secondly, the focus on the critical risk is a cornerstone of this bill
and would be a game changer in our view in freeing up businesses to really
focus on the risks which both employers and employees should be
actively managing and reducing the most.
For many years, employers have necessarily interpreted their obligations as
requiring them to cover all risks to demonstrate compliance,
rather than to actively focus on and manage the most dangerous
of those risks.
That approach has created unnecessary complexity and confusion for many
businesses. Significant time, energy, and cost are spent
documenting and managing all risks without a corresponding
improvement in safety outcomes.
We think it is important that the bill retains this focus and that it is
the process laid out in the legislation for identifying and managing
risks and not prescribing the risks themselves that would be most useful for
improving health and safety practices and health and safety outcomes.
An area we think the bill could further strengthen is around the mechanism for
newly defined small PCBU's to transition from a
critical risk-focused approach to an all-risks model as they grow.
Workforce growth is often not linear, with staff numbers
fluctuating due to fixed-term contracts, seasonal demand, or
project-based work. And we feel that without clear thresholds and
transition rules, businesses could face uncertainty about their
obligations and risk either over-complying prematurely or
unintentionally falling short. With one purpose of the bill
being clarity, we do think that a transition period should be considered for
businesses at the margins of small and not small, and a clear
process for working through that with a defined transition mechanism,
potentially with support from WorkSafe for that transition.
My last comment is
about the commencement. I noticed the previous speaker also spoke about this.
Given this is one of the three or four core pieces of legislation
for business, and I'm sure there will be a robust
select committee process ahead with ultimate shaping of the bill
remaining unknown until the third reading, I do think the committee should
consider recommending a commencement period of six months following
the Royal Assent to ensure that employers and employees have time to
transition properly. Thank you again.
I would like to reiterate Business Canterbury's support for this bill and the
recommendation that it does proceed, and I'm happy to take any questions.
Thank you, Leanne, very much appreciate it.
Can I just start with a quick question for you?
We've heard a lot from different submitters about the size of
the business and consideration of its
requirementsWith your representation of
2,800 businesses,
what's your comment or thoughts on the variety, I
guess, based on industry versus size?
So for example, we hear a lot about bus companies being the same, whether they've
got sort of 15 staff or 500 staff in terms of the
risk, but then of course, taking into consideration accounting firms or service
providers. Do you see a difference or discrepancy there that we might be able to
take some thought on?
Yeah, absolutely. I think industry does play a big part in terms
of the level of risk that, your two examples,
driving buses and getting paper cuts are probably two different
risk areas. And so I do think that proportionality is really important when it
comes to the industry sector.
I think small businesses, as we know, have less
capacity and less capability around some of these areas,
and so making sure that they have good guidance and good education
is really important. But I think the industry and the size will play a part in
terms of that defining of those risks.
Thank you very much. We have a question from Jan Tinetti.
Hi, Leanne, and thank you for your submission.
Mine's also on the small PCB use in the
critical risk-only carve-out.
So I've got two. So firstly, you talk about the grace
period and the transition period.
What duration of grace period would Business Canterbury consider
appropriate, and how should compliance expectations differ
during that period?
Yeah. So if I can talk about the transition first.
I think the transition is really just to ensure that
employers and employees have time to actually put in place the
appropriate changes that will come as a result of the Bill,
rather than it being immediately after assent.
I think that will pose some challenges for all involved,
potentially WorkSafe as well. The second question in
regards to carve-out.
So this is really just around understanding that.
I just want to make sure I've understood your question correctly, Jan.
Yeah.
So,
when you talk about the transition from it being a small
to gradually becoming a slightly bigger organization and then carrying
over that threshold, is that what you're referring to?
Yeah.
I think where it becomes challenging
is that for a lot of small businesses, if they win a
particular piece of work, they may have to grow their
workforce on a temporary basis. They don't necessarily always know if that's going
to be permanent,
and so that transition from being small or micro to sort of medium,
at times doesn't necessarily mean that it's going to be like that for a long period
of time. So I think it's just trying to work with those businesses to
understand what that carve-out period might look
like. I think we've also got a situation where you've got
seasonal work,
where you might have to upscale the number of employees that you have for a certain
time. So in our submission, we've talked about averaging that out
over a nine-month period-
Mm
... to make sure that it is actually sustainable.
So if those numbers
are
greater than a small business for that nine-month period, then I would say they
would transition into the
larger
category or threshold for business.
But I think just taking into account that small businesses often
use their
ability to upscale staff as and when needed, until
they are confident that that work is going to carry on, particularly over.
Well, that's what we've seen over the last couple of years with the challenging
economy. Let's hope that it's going to get better.
So can I just ask a follow-up on that?
You talked about the seasonal workers, and I read that in your submission
around over that period of time. Do you think,
should they be treated the same in that
instance, or should there be a separate category so that it
avoids that whole uncertainty?
Yeah, look, that would certainly be another option to actually consider,
because there are a number of industries that will have seasonal workers
every year. So that may be an easier way of managing it, to
have some different options for those types of businesses as opposed
to having to go in and out, because that may increase compliance if
you're having to constantly report on that as well.
Yeah.
Yeah, it's a great idea.
Thank you.
Thank you, Leanne. It's incredibly helpful, and thank you for your submission.
It's really appreciated.
You're welcome.
We move on now to our next submitter.
Thank you.
We now have Jonathan Godfrey with
us this morning.
I do hope actually Jonathan's online with us now. I'll just check that.
If not-
Catherine Dear, I think we saw something from the clerk of the committee that-
Yes. We have-
... we don't. Yeah
... yeah, we have Hazardous Substances New Zealand.
So look, we'll move on to Hazardous Substances
Professionals New Zealand now. I was just assuming that
Jonathan would have jumped on in that time, which I
made the wrong assumption. So,
look, we'll hand over to you, Ken.
I believe, Ken and Kevin from Hazardous Substances Professionals New
Zealand. Wonderful, welcome.
Good morning.
Good morning. And we have 10 minutes with you this morning.
Thank you for making yourselves available, and thank you for being online early
so that we could keep our submissions going. We have 10 minutes.
Time includes questions. We'll pass that over to you now.
Can I ask, is Kevin on here? I can't see him.
Kevin is on here. He just hasn't turned his camera on or his audio.
So we can see and hear you, we just can't see and hear Kevin.
Kevin's taking the lead.
Here we are now. Sorry.
Okay. Kevin's taking the lead.
Apologies.
Go for it,
Kevin.
Yeah.
Hopefully you heard the spiel.
Yep. Good morning, all. I'd like to introduce myself.
Kevin Mair, a chartered professional engineer, consultant, and Kane Clark,
technical manager
for Responsible Care New Zealand, National Chemical Industry
Association.
We're executive members of and presenting on behalf of
the Hazardous Substance Professionals New Zealand Incorporated,
a body of professional personnel, including the compliance
certifiers, all directly associated with the
industries which are handling or using hazardous
substances throughout New Zealand.
We're at the coalface providing the required compliance
certification and expert advice, designing
new plants or assessing existing as being safe,
providing technical chemical expertise into areas
ranging from importing, manufacture, use,
handling, and end disposal, including for
emergency situations across all spectrums of New
Zealand industries.
We are a full member organization of Hazends, and
we, the Hazardous Substance Professionals New Zealand, fully support the
present submission presented by Hazends.
We would like to reinforce that the Hazardous Substance Professionals New
Zealand do not support a two-tier system
requiring PCBUs with less than 20 staff
to only be required to consider the critical risks and
not required to consider all risks so far as
is reasonably practicable and further detailed in our written
submission.
Whilst we understand the intention of this change,
we do not believe it will improve the overall position of
safety within our industries.
The risks associated with the storage, the handling,
use, or disposal of a hazardous substance can
change from what was considered a low risk to
presenting a more critical level of risk due to the
introduction of what is perceived by the PCBU
as a seemingly innocuous factor.
Quality risk management advice and application
is something of scale, and as such, shall be
effectively applied on a scale proportionate to the
relative size and complexity of the target
activity and based on expert knowledge,
something that all PCBUs don't have in relation to the
hazardous substances.
All risks need to be assessed, but critical risks
subsequently identified in a fundamental process do
need more attention.
The Hazardous Substance Professionals New Zealand strongly present to this
committee that the Health and Safety at Work Hazardous Substance
Regulations are outdated, far too prescriptive,
and not aligned with the Health and Safety at Work Act
2015 and the Health and Safety at Work
Regulations
2016, both of which focus on a
risk-based and performance-managed approach.
The Hazardous Substance Regulations don't.
We do appreciate that the Hazardous Substance Regulations are, of
necessity, a very complex and diverse set of
regulations, however proven reasonably effective
over many years.
They cover substances ranging from a mild hand
cleaner to an explosive gel across the
full spectrum of procurement, storage, use,
handling, and disposal of the substance.
Approximately one-third of all New Zealand businesses and
types of businesses are affected, meaning a
one-size compliant regime does not fit all
industry.
The Hazardous Substance Professionals New Zealand strongly considers
that the Amendment Bill does not address the need for
more flexible regulatory tools, such as
SafeWork instruments, industry approved codes of practice,
performance standards, referenced AS/NZS, and international
standards and regulatory guidance.
Currently, the SafeWork instrument seems to be replacing
the use of approved codes of practice.
The SafeWork instrument, as an enforceable tool,
was introduced to expedite the change process for
regulation to provide some specific guidance or
extension to those regulations.
The initial release of SafeWork instruments was
effectively a number of HASNO-approved codes of practice,
which were stripped of the informative content and only
leaving the normative portion.
We lost the critical industry language, and the industry
guidance is now absent from those.
Due to the diversity of the industries and businesses
throughout New Zealand encompassed by the Hazardous Substance
Regulations, SafeWork instruments are a must.
We need them to expand the regulations into specific target
areas. However, the SafeWork instruments
are an extension of the legislation, and like the
regulations, are black and white with just the
normative content of what is required and what must be achieved.
Missing from those SafeWork instruments is the informative
guidance as to how industry can practically
achieve compliance with the regulations.
That is the place of the approved codes of practice in our
sector. HoweverFrom our perspective,
approved codes of practice should not be considered as
safe harbor.
As due to the diversity of the industry base, they should
only be considered as good guidance, best practice,
and each application of this guidance should still be
adequately assessed as being appropriate for that
application.
All risks need to be appropriately considered for every
application. There needs to be a much greater
collaboration in the development of the safe work instruments,
approved codes of practice, and the general guidance documents at the
outset, and not just after the draft has been
completed by the regulator when offered for
consultation.
We often see the release of guidance, which is
ambiguous,
inconsistent with the regulations,
not technically correct, and without proven principles,
impractical to implement across all affected industries,
and which has not been adequately consulted on prior to
release.
Some of this difficulty experienced is due to the guidance
being prescriptive legislation based and not
performance based.
All guidance
requires consistency in the input of all stakeholders from the
outset of their development, the regulatory bodies,
the professional servicing the industry, and the industries themselves.
One body does not have all the answers.
All parties need a fair and reasonable opportunity
to duly consider and respond to the development
of this guidance with some prior warning of it coming,
not dumped in the inbox with a requested return
period of two weeks
or over a holiday break, as previously
occurred.
We thank you for this opportunity to be heard, and we would ask the
committee if it has any questions.
Wonderful.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Kevin. Do appreciate the detailed submission you've made.
We've got a question from Jan Tinetti.
Kia ora, and thanks, Kevin and Ken, for that submission.
And can I just say that I found this submission
particularly interesting because there is so much in here
that I've not even thought about before, such
as the relationship with the definition of critical risk and
the long latency health risks. I found that absolutely
fascinating and thank you very much for that.
And I guess
there's so much in this that I'm quite keen to know if there's
any international jurisdictions or regulatory models that New Zealand
could draw on to better integrate hazarded
substances into a modern risk-based
health and safety framework. Because I think from reading your
submission, we're missing something if we don't get this right.
So is there anything that we can look at in this area?
If I may.
Yes. Look, and to be honest, Jan, what we have,
if it was applied cohesively, is very good.
We used to have very good regulations under the HASNO Act.
It's still there, but the transfer to WorkSafe, we've lost a lot there.
Right.
It worked a lot better beforehand.
The loss of the approved handler-
Yeah
... and the codes of practice has been very significant.
Right.
And
the difficulty in getting things fixed.
Yeah.
The regulations themselves, there was a promise of them being
updated immediately after implementation.
But look, unfortunately, we've had Whakaari White Island, COVID-19, we had the
mosque incident. We had three false starts to get this underway,
and there's no appetite to do it now.
If we could fix that, return to the emphasis of approved codes of
practice,
and include the safe work instruments where they are not appropriate,
sorry, where the codes are not appropriate,
I think we've all got all the tools already.
The international standards are exemplary.
We work really well, trans-Tasman with Australia.
Yeah.
And we work very well. So little wordings
and things like that are causing five-figure sums for small
business in New Zealand because of the prescriptive application instead
of risk-based. But that's driven by audit.
All right? They're auditing word of law instead of the risk intent and the
intent of the regulations. So I don't think we need to go further than what we
already have. It just needs an ensemble look instead of
silo looks.
So, with the international standards, the code's excellent
already.
Thanks, Ken. That's very helpful.
It just needs to work better.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
As I mentioned, a very detailed and helpful submission, so we do appreciate your
contribution to this process.
Thank you, and we'll move on now to our next submitter.
So now we do have Jonathan-
Thank you.
Thank you. We do have Jonathan Godfrey online
ready for us. Welcome, Jonathan. We-
Good morning.
Good morning. We appear to have five minutes with you this morning.
Yes.
So we include questions in that time, but it's over to you
how you utilize that, and we will pass over to you now.
Yep. So basically, I'm going to approach from a slightly
philosophical point of view. So it's a useful analogy for the bill and how it
should be dealt with by Parliament. It's the purification of silver in a crucible.
The practice of purifying silver involved heating it in a crucible
and driving off the impurities. Basically, the unstable
products would break down under the heat and be driven off, and you're
left with pure silver.
So, how is this relevant here? Courts and Parliament, as the
highest court in the land, is
Analogous to a crucible, and the function is to take evidence,
and as with the purification of silver, burn away the dross, the
irrelevancy, and thus refine the evidence such that only
truth remains.
Now, I put it to the committee that this bill is filled with matters that are not
actually relevant to health and safety within the workplace.
These irrelevancies need to be burnt away, as with the
irrelevancies or the dross in a crucible.
Now, what's irrelevancy in the bill?
The bill asserts that the size of a workplace is relevant to determining whether
attention ought to be paid to a risk within the workplace.
That is incorrect.
What is it about a risk that makes it suddenly not essential for a workplace to
consider it in terms of development of risk mitigations if they have
20 or fewer employees, but needs to be considered if there are
21?
Proposing a carve-out will lead to operational creep in the function of the law,
whereby the threshold slowly creeps up over time as case law
sets the threshold higher.
I think Occam's razor should apply here.
Do not multiply entities beyond that which is necessary.
You have everything as simple as possible,
and by that, no threshold.
Everyone treats risks the same, no matter the size of the workplace.
And another one is that it's fundamentally true that risks are risks
no matter the size. So,
basically, the same all the way through.
Now, regarding the certainty that Ms.
Van Velden claims is not present within the health and safety sphere, she needs to
be reminded most firmly that New Zealand legislation is based on the Australian
model legislation for the states.
And with that legislation, Australia has significantly lower rates of
both events causing death and events causing injury.
Even chronic exposures to hazardous substances cause
injury over time, and they're not technically critical risks.
Our rates will not decrease because the changes proposed by the bill, and in
no jurisdiction on the planet has modifying legislation in the manner of this bill
led to such a decrease.
Now, overcompliance is raised as a bit of a shibboleth by
some, it's a bit of a myth that's put out by those who don't want
regulation in their sphere,
not because it's not needed, but because they do not comprehend the need for it.
And as I say in my submission, there's a fundamental right to return home
physically intact and not subtly injured by a risk too minor to be
classed by this bill as critical.
Health and safety regulations are not actually there to control the good employers.
As they will understand their sector, they will understand the risks and associated
hazards, and will act accordingly without regulatory prompting.
This is the case in my own workplace.
We drive health and safety, and it's participatory.
The workers control it.
Instead, health and safety regulations are there to deal with the bad employers,
the cowboys who do not understand their sectors and who have a bit of
a she'll be right attitude. The Kiwi attitude, as it was put in the '90s
when I was being trained. They complain about health and safety
without understanding the tiniest bit about it and how it works within their
sector.
Those cowboys are responsible for the majority of adverse events within the New
Zealand workplaces.
Getting regulation out of the workplace lets those cowboys have free
reign and the rates of adverse events increase at a
cost to society as a whole.
Returning to the analogy of the crucible, there is another irrelevancy in this bill
to be burnt away.
The ideology that holds that complexity is bad, that it
causes uncertainty, and that it must therefore be removed.
Reducing health and safety regulation does not reduce uncertainty,
and this is shown by way of testing in other metaphorical crucibles.
Those are the peer-reviewed academic journal and the official statistics of various
regulators.
Decrease the regulations and you'll increase the rate of incidents, as shown in
Texas.
Improve the regulations by ensuring they are well-written in plain English
and backed up by a regulatory agency that is well-resourced and
gives advice freely, and the opposite occurs.
The cowboys do not get free rein, and you'll decrease the rate of incidents.
Note the rates in the UK, the EU, and Australia
are all lower than that in New Zealand.
I thank the committee for its time.
Thank you very much, Jonathan. That is all the time we have with you this morning,
but it is very much appreciated, your contribution to this process.
Thank you. Have a good day.
You, too.
All right. We'll move on to the New Zealand Dairy Workers Union.
We have Jared Phillips and Chris Flatt with us.
Jared, I can see that you are there. I'll just need you to turn on your camera.
Have you got Chris with you, or is he in a separate
Zoom window?
Kia ora.
Good morning. Kia ora.
Oh, you do sound like you're in the same room. Wonderful. Welcome.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning. That includes time for questions.
Okay.
And, it's over to you now.
Thanks. Thanks, Katie. Tēnā koutou katoa. Ko Chris Flatt taku ingoa.
Thanks to the select committee. I'm the national secretary of the Dairy Workers
Union, Te Rūnanga Waiu, and we have a
written submission, which we'll take as read, and the critical is have the question
time, as we know. I'm going to hand over just shortly, though, to our general
counsel, Jared Phillips, who's heavily involved in health and safety across our
9,000 members. He's going to talk you through four key areas that we
see with this amendment. We strongly oppose this
amended law in health and safety. These key areas are critical risk,
non-critical risk, small business carve-out, officers' duties, and then
we'll open up for questions after that. Thank you.
Kia ora koutou everybody. DWU is a high-density union
representing just under 9,000 dairy manufacturing workers throughout Aotearoa,
New Zealand, primarily in provincial and rural towns,
representing 90% of employees, workers in the industry.
The DWU has dedicated health and safety resources, roles, and
budgets, and views health and safety and injury support
as key union functions. We strongly disapprove of the lack of
consultation with workers and unions on these changes, and note that the
DWU has taken all of the limited opportunities to engage.
For example, a delegation of DWU site representatives from Westland,
Takanini, Kerikeri, Taumutu, and Edgecumbe
attended the Ensuring Workers' Voice on Health and Safety Reform
Forum at the Parliament buildings in late 2024.
Which was arranged because of lack of engagement from Minister Brooke van Velden.
The DWU opposes this bill and sees the relaxation of non-critical
risk management and the restrictive definition of non-critical risk as an
inherently slippery slope on health and safety standards.
A green light to relax on non-critical risk, which in our view reduces
the overall importance of robust health and safety systems.
And aside from the topmost proactive PCBUs, we think the slip in
health and safety management will negatively impact on critical risk management
as well. For example, six weeks ago, we dealt with a notifiable
event, electrocution on a smaller dairy manufacturing company's site,
which could have resulted in death if the worker was not young and fit.
The employer did not notify WorkSafe and only did so after we
said, "If you don't notify that WorkSafe, the DWU will notify
WorkSafe." So, in this sort of context with this sort of treatment of
the notification rules, the DWU believes that it is very
deluded that a scheduled definition of critical risk, plus whether the
event or injury is notifiable, is going to be coherently followed
by PCBUs in a way that manages down critical risk.
I now want to talk about non-critical risk.
We think the bill grossly underestimates the problem of non-critical risk in
our workplaces. The mismanagement of non-critical risk is
like a giant drain on everybody. Foremost, the workers who are harmed and
their lives who are put on hold, then the ecosystem of lost time, medical
support, medical reports, ACC support, union-run
cases to have injuries recognized and entitlements paid,
rehabilitation, shift cover, temporary work arrangements, and
so on. It goes on. Preventative risk management is the
plug in all of this drain, but the bill positions this risk
management as an unnecessary compliance cost, which is
wrong.
Lower grade injuries make up more than 50% of ACC's work injury
costs. The DWU put significant resources into ensuring that workers'
ACC claims and entitlements are met.
Every year, the DWU spends more money and time on worker injury support than any
other type of grievance or dispute.
On the small business carve-out, the DWU opposes this.
We have concerns about the impacts of this legislation in the on-farm dairy
sector. Our written submissions outline our relationship to the on-farm sector,
including allying with sections of that sector that are taking the high
road on health and safety, not the low road, which we believe is
green-lighted by the proposed legislation.
On the officer duties, the DWU opposes changes to officer duties
to confine officer due diligence duties strictly to officers'
governance roles. The DWU's own policy is for stronger
penalties and is drafting policy wording to support corporate manslaughter laws
for negligent employers.
The DWU believes that if National MPs support this legislation, then they're
going back against their own party's legislation adopted under the legitimate
pressure and issues posed arising out of the Pike River inquiry.
It is your constituents in regional areas like Hawera,
Eltham, Kauri, Mangateroto that can be affected by these
changes.
Pass over, Chris, to see if you have any other comment.
No, look, we've just opposed the changes in this space.
It seems like we have gone through decades of major
reviews and insights into health and safety, and again,
we're seeing core areas of
agreed reform uncut by this legislation.
We strongly oppose it, and
we'll be heavily involved in these areas.
I want to really just highlight that we have membership, unlike many
unions, throughout provincial New Zealand.
Most of our membership lives in seats that are represented by National MPs, and
there's a real disdain and anger about health and safety once again
being a political football, and that these changes will actually harm
workers and a range of industries that have got
an appalling record, frankly. So I'll pause there.
I know there'll be questions and areas that you'll want to unpick a bit more.
Yes. Thank you very much. We do have two questions at this point.
We have the first question from Ginny Anderson.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I just wanted to pick up on the point you made in
your submission around the carve-out for small business
on-farm. Can you specify why particularly you've highlighted that
and any particular risks you'd like to advise the committee of?
We have been involved in both research at a research
level into health and safety outcomes in the on-farm sector,
through a report that we supported and research that we supported
in 2017, which showed very grave sort of health and
safety outcomes in the on-farm sector.
Happily, though, there was also a period where there was a, you know-
Certain improvement and the formation of organizational
approach to this amongst the on-farm sector with
the formation of a
support hub that helped rural workers.
And we allied with that, and we saw that as a
progressive and positive move within the on-farm sector.
And we support that, and we support that type of development
and progress within the on-farm sector, which we understand is
also very important for labor market reasons in the
on-farm sector in terms of attracting employment
where there's an employment shortage and so forth.
So,
our industry, whilst the DW covers manufacturing workers and
manufacturing environment, we have a interest in the
on-farm sector and the conditions there.
So just to add to that, look, the carve-out there is just going to make the health
and safety in this space even worse.
We have a historically awful record on on-farm health and
safety. The inquiries we consistently get on our
phone lines from workers who want representation on-farm often
are related, yes, wage and conditions, but particularly around health and safety
issues or seeing practices that aren't positive.
And to have a carve-out that we know there's been national
strategies with Federated Farmers, peak industry bodies across agriculture
sectors to carve out a area where we are
historically and currently woeful in comparison to the rest of the world.
We kill more workers in forestry and on-farm in New Zealand per
capita than anywhere. I think it's double that
than Australia's or England's death rates, and it's horrific.
So we would strongly oppose this carve-out for small businesses.
We believe there is a way that small businesses can get the support.
We understand the transaction costs, but this is why in our submission, we talk
about how we can link as the union movement and with
related bodies. We've worked closely with Federated Farmers about
supporting these small businesses. You just don't carve them out.
You don't just give the bad operators the ability just to go worse on
standards. You actually have to build structure around it.
So this is the wrong approach, having the small business carve-out in our view.
Thank you. We have time for a question from Jan Tinetti.
Thank you, and thanks for your submission.
I just want to ask a question around the drafting and legal
clarity. And you raise a concern around Section 25.
It raises that concern that the failure to prioritize critical risks is
expressly not an offense.
How does this provision affect enforcement
decisions by WorkSafe and the practical
incentives facing the PCBUs?
It doesn't make sense to us to
create legislation that purports to
emphasize critical risk but then have a sort of
carve-out let off for not prioritizing critical risk.
It doesn't make sense to us, and we think that that is
part of a reduction of accountability on
PCBUs that these proposed
changes are bringing forward,
and it will make
litigation more difficult.
So that being the case then, the whole idea is
around giving clarity, and you're saying it doesn't make sense.
So do you think it's achieving the opposite of what it's
actually proposing to do, that it's not achieving that clarity?
Yes. We believe it's not achieving that clarity, and also we
believe that by
relaxing health and safety standards in any area of health and safety,
has a flow on effect of further relaxation on the more
critical
matters and
matters relating to workplace death and risk that relates to workplace death.
And Jan, just to add in there, and I know we talk about this in our submission.
It's a really important issue because health and safety is an ecosystem.
It isn't just one part that is critical or non-critical.
This is a whole operational framework.
And so when you remove the focus there on non-critical, you're going to
have, and you're going to allow a slippery slope effect, and we talk about that.
You undermine systems that are in place to capture
all of the risks, and particularly those that can ramp up into a critical risk
space. So we think it's going to have the inverse effect than what's being
intended in this legislation. And that's been our experience on the ground
across our industry and across related industries, is it's
that whole ecosystem you're building across non-critical and critical that
gives you a health and safety culture that then, and with the worker
input, through the importance of worker input into this, through health and safety
committees and elected officials who are trained into this space.
It's an absolute holistic approach, and this approach unpicks that
and will have the inverse effect than what was intended.
Thank you.
Thank you very much to the both of you for joining us and contributing to this
process. We do appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thank you. Committee, we'll move into our break time
now